## ***Feeling the Past***: How a interactive text-based educational game could influence historical source selection.

### Introduction

This reflection piece discusses the project *Feeling the Past*, which I created during the spring semester of 2020. The project was part of the module *History in a Digitized World* (DigiZeit) by Martin Dusinberre and Daniel McDonald, tutored by Leyla Feiner. DigiZeit is an exclusive module for students of the Master degree *History of the Contemporary World / Zeitgeschichte* at the University of Zürich. 

It is assumed that the reader has played *Feeling the Past* recently. This can be done on the *Lives in Transit* website here: https://livesintransit.org/login. In the paper—after a brief description of the thought process behind the project—selected challenges are reflected upon and contextualized using contemporary literature to gain new insights for writing history in a digitized age.

### Why is there only a small number of objects in historical source selection?

My initial idea for a project—even before thinking about creating a game—was asking the question of how to introduce more objects into the source selection of historians. I started thinking about this issue in Summer 2019 during an internship at the *Historisches und Völkerkundemuseum St.Gallen* (HVM), where I encountered a large number of fascinating objects and histories, but a significant lack of academic writing thereof. I furthermore observed that the teaching at the University of Zürich focuses strongly on textual sources, which for example is reflected in the *Grundlagenpapier* (Universität Zürich, Historisches Seminar, 2013). The *Grundlagenpapier* aims to serve as the basic methodological orienting point for young historians studying in Zürich. Yet, in chapter 6 titled "Quellenkritik und Quelleninterpretation" the focus almost exclusively lies on text as source (p. 38ff). Similarily in chapter 7, "Einführung in die Quellenkritik / Quellenanalyse"—even though there is a specific section for "Bilder / Artefakte"—most of the content of the section relates to using images as sources and only very little instructs the reader how to work with objects (p. 42f). Objects often tell different stories or stories closer to the people of the past. There is an important part of history lost when disregarding them as historical sources and a lot of work can be enriched and supplemented considering them closely.

I observed two key reasons for the current situation: accessibility, and the lack of awareness. In comparison to most textual sources, objects are more difficult to represent digitally, almost impossible to replicate, and in general more challenging to gain historical insights from. Text-based sources are more convenient and will therefore be used more frequently. As already illustrated, working with objects is only marginally taught in university and up until recently historians have perceived close work with objects part of other disciplines rather than their own "toolkit" (Findlen, 2020, p. 271). Thus reaching out to collections or museums and using their objects as sources is only rarely considered by students, who later become researchers; a disconnect quite foreign to the 19th century origins of the field (miller!, history and its objects). The goal of *Feeling the Past* now is to illustrate the possible benefits of working with objects as sources to motivate historians to consider a wider range of sources in their future work.

### Selected Challenges and Essential Insights

#### Collaborative Working using Git

Presenting your work in progress to peers and receiving feedback are essential steps in an historian's work. Current technologies, namely Git, used for version control in software development offer new ways of collaborative working. In the case of *Feeling the Past*, I greatly benefited from using GitLab to communicate with the other students of DigiZeit. This especially showed during the game's beta which was conducted during May, in which the other DigiZeit member were able to give feedback using the *Issues* function. In the later stages of development it was also really useful to have collaborators like Daniel McDonald push changes to the game repository, for example in case of coding mistakes, which I then could easily either accept or discard with a single click. 

While in this case Git was used primarily for software development aspects, the same functionalties can definitely be applied to conventional historical research. Git offers both a well structured discussion platform and file version control, in which the rights and duties of each member can be clearly defined—essentials for productive collaboration. (Some secondary literature about collaborative working in History, maybe Lynn Hunt)

#### Working with ***Lives in Transit***

Working with an existing project had both advantages and disadvantages. For one, creating something as labourious as a computer game—something I definitely would not have been able to complete from scratch in roughly three months—was made possible by utilizing an existing framework. In my case, this did not cause any conflicts between what I wanted to do and what was possible, but it surely influenced how I decided to design my storyline. The tasks are based on the exercises I encountered in the *Lives in Transit* demo and what I remembered of the playtest of *Plantation Lives*. If I wanted the player to be able to virtually pick up an object in a 3D environment during an exercise and freely rotate it, this would not have been possible as *Marugoto* does not support 3D modules.

Also, working with project specific software meant that if I encountered an issue or did not understand something, I could not simply use Google to find a solution. While I was learning how to use *Marugoto*, the documentation was still a work-in-progress. Therefore, I either had to solve the issue by trial and error or consult someone more familiar with the project. Collaborative working and communication, described in the previous section, once again were key aspects and key skills necessary to successfully complete *Feeling the Past*. An unfinished project also meant occasionally dealing with newly occurring problems. In the case of *Lives in Transit* these were the dysfunctional importer and the bug during May. As a writer in the project I contributed to the solutions by reporting unexpected behaviour.  

With increasingly more collaborative research in the humanities (and especially in digital humanities) being done, historians will need to learn how to act in and interact within a larger organizational framework—both for the success of their own and the overarching project. Putnam argues that currently "historians are notoriously disinclined to collaborate, but in part that is because diffuse asynchronous collaboration (which is to say, reading other people's work and building on it) functions remarkably well for us (Putnam, 2016, p. 400). Close collaboration and communication already are considered key components of 21st century competencies in STEM fields (Jang, 2016). History appears to already be moving in the same direction. As Lynn Hunt notes, "history writing in the global era can only be a collaborative form of inquiry, whether between types of approaches or between scholars from different parts of the globe. We are not just interconnected but also interdependent" (Hunt, 2015, p. 151). Critical voices argue that from a career perspective co-authored collaborative work will be valued less than a independent project, therefore its popularity is connected to the nature of historical careers (Flaherty, 2017). There is an active discussion regarding collaborative research in historical research and especially with increasingly more digital research being done, I feel like the repositioning and restructuring of collaboration in History in inevitable. 

#### Marugoto as a writing tool

*Feeling the Past* was written in *Marugoto*, the engine underlying every storyline in *Lives in Transit*. While for this project it was used to construct a narrative with a pedagogical goal, the question arises if there are other applications in historical research for it. In this section I will first talk about how *Marugoto* performed for *Feeling the Past* and then discuss other possibile ways of using the tool. 

*Marugoto* proved to be a good authoring tool for creating a piece of interactive fiction with an educational intent like *Feeling the Past*. Similar to *uAdventure* by Pérez-Colado et al., it allowed someone without a lot of technical experience to create a fully functional game by mainly using examples and a manual to learn without a great amount of specific training (Pérez-Colado et al., 2019). At the same time, the authors also found that in teaching a workshop-based approach to game-making allowed them to explore more advanced goals in smaller periods of time compared to a self-taught approach, while possibly leading to "false successes" (p. 40). During the last session of DigiZeit I was asked if I had preferred something more complex like a 3D based engine. In my opinion this would have caused the game to be more focused on the experience of *being* in the museum instead of the exercises and what can be learned by them. Additionally the workload of creating a 3D game—even with a existing engine and presets—would have meant less freedom and less time to conceptually work on the game. Using a text-based engine and static pages allows the player to focus on the tasks, which for me were the most important part. My familiarity with *Lives in Transit* and its limits and possibilities before beginning the project helped me to quickly plan the contents of the game. There is a fair bit of functionality of *Marugoto* I did not explore in my game. The main reason for this is the lack of time and partially a lack of awareness. The learning curve of *Marugoto* was steep, having to understand both how the folder hierarchy relates to the different pages displayed and what each variable controls. Once understood though, the work becomes fluent, as the knowledge of one functionality facilitates the learning of the next. I think a person without much technical experience will be able to pick it up in a few days of focussed work, even more so now that there exists a tutorial and a documentation.

At the time of writing (October 2020), the only other storyline in *Lives in Transit*, Martin Dusinberre's *Plantation Lives*, also takes the approach to create a piece of interactive fiction. The question therefore arises: Can *Marugoto* be used to produce something other than interactive fiction? In my opinion it can, which I will illustrate by thinking through the example of using *Marugoto* to publish a piece of historical research and describing the advantages and disadvantages an author might be confronted with.

Ignoring the current process of publishing something using *Marugoto* and just focussing on the writing aspect, one can see that *Marugoto* offers a variety of advantageous tools which cannot be found in conventional digital publishing. For one the author has more control over the structure of the reading, meaning that by using *pageTransitions* the writer can guide the reader through a piece in a particular way, for example skipping parts and theoretically even going back. While hindering the conventional reading flow, this offers opportunities for authors interested in methods like juxtaposition, e.g. leading the reader back to the same piece of text or source at different stages of reading the piece. Here another function of *Marugoto* becomes clear: being able to include multimedia sources inside the text. Authors can easily expose their readers to audio-visual sources and for example allow them to interact with them like enlarging a picture. This could strengthen an argument while at the same time constructing a story which feels more alive. *Marugoto* can also facilitate the communication between author and reader by using the notebook function. Not only can the readers add notes to specific pages themselves, but the author can predetermine certain multimedia elements and text sections which will appear in the notebook. After finishing the piece the reader then can download a PDF of the notebook containing both sources and text sections which the author deems most important while also having their own thoughts throughout the piece documented. This could then make using the piece in their own research easier.

The disadvantages are clear: For one, *Marugoto* comes with the initial effort of learning how to use it. Like I described above, I think that anyone should be able to pick it up in a few days, but people will only try if the benefits are great enough in comparison with conventional publishing. Time is another factor which has to be considered. Creating something in *Marugoto* takes more time than simply editing a text file and runs the risk of not working because of coding mistakes. Another important aspect is that the abovementioned advantages are only productive if used correctly. They bear the risk of obstructing the content of the piece or distracting the reader. 

*Marugoto* should therefore not be seen as a *one for all* solution, but rather as one possibility of many to publish a historical piece digitally. I could also imagine publishing a *Marugoto* piece in tandem with a conventional paper which interact with each other, even though time constrictions will force an author to choose one of the options rather than both.

#### Digital Databases and reaching the fundamental goal of ***Feeling the Past***

Databases are a historian's window into a digital archive or a modern collection. Their structure influences the way we select sources and shape our research. Naturally, they tend to focus on their job as archival tools rather than a historian's research help. While a considerable amount of writing discusses how archives influence historians (see for example: Farge, 1989 / Trouillot, 1995), there is still more work to be done regarding which impact the digital advancements of the past decades had on the way we conduct our research today. One example is Lara Putnam's article on "The Transnational and the Text-Searchable"(Putnam, 2016). She examines how source digitalization has transformed the work of historians, especially with an eye on transnational research. In relation to my project, an important part is her citing of a study by Ian Milligan, which showed that in the wake of digitalization the citations of two newspapers increased tenfold while citation of their non-digitized contemporaries stayed steady or fell (p. 388, Milligan, 2013). This has important implications on *Feeling the Past's* fundamental goal of introducing more objects to the historical source selection. 

For one, digitalization seems to be a key component to the solution. As more and more source work is being done digitally, trying to facilitate finding objects for historians using this channel seems to be natural. Like I mentioned above, most databases are created focussing on their archival task, rather than to support historical research. Therefore one option of getting more objects into historical research would be reconceptualizing digital data-sets, something I tried in *Feeling the Past's* third task with the presentation of the straitjacket in the style of Neil MacGregor's *A History of the World in 100 Objects*, based both on the original data-set of the HVM and my personal impressions of the object. By focussing on different aspects of the object, like questions regarding its social context or production, already on the level of the data-set the work of a historian can be facilitated or supported, and thanks to the digital format continuously expanded. While I feel like this would definitely be a step in the right direction, it won't change much if another fundamental problem isn't solved: Access.

Similar to disparaties in access of digital sources (Putnam, 2016, p. 389), there are differences how and which objects are accessible to the public. As an example: the collection of the Historisches und Völkerkundemuseum St.Gallen includes around 80'000 objects, which are inventoried in an internal digital database. Thanks to this database, to which I have access because I work in the HVM, I was able to find the objects used in *Feeling the Past*. There exists a public online database (www.online-collection.ch/), which only displays 8'000 data-sets, 10 percent of the whole collection. 90 percent are therefore not available to the public and cannot be found without internal access. I think this contributes to the favouring of text over objects, as historians are simply not aware of all the objects they could theoretically use as sources.

#### Avoiding Normativity

One important aspect while designing *Feeling the Past* was to avoid teaching the player a specific way of thinking about objects as sources. My goal was to simulate my own experience doing a internship in a museum, realizing the possible benefits of objects as sources by coming in contact with them. By having the players interpret the tasks for themselves—choosing a student-centered pedagogical approach, which is deemed more appropriate for developing critical thinkers, self-sufficient learners, and problem solvers—based on their own interests as historians a greater learning effect can be achieved than by displaying a singular approach to object analysis (Lahnwong, 2019). For the same reason, even though this was criticized during the beta with the DigiZeit members during May, the end of the game does not have a final page, in which the main character reflects upon their day and draws conclusions. This would diminish the learning effect gained by having the players think for themselves about how they would approach the tasks of the game.  

#### Unmet Goals and Practical Decisions

By choosing the open approach mentioned in the previous paragraph some insights, which I intended to convey, were not successfully communicated. This conclusion is based on the feedback during the beta. One such example is the idea behind the second task of the game, where the player has to choose which object corresponds to a data-set. The choice of the player does not affect the later stages of the game and at no point is there feedback regarding if the choice was correct or false. The goal was to show the volatility of the work in a collection, that even the people working and creating the databases are sometimes not certain what they are looking at as well as that the databases will not be perfect. Based on the feedback during May, these insights were not communicated successfully. A different approach was chosen in the *Lives in Transit* version. Here later in the game the collection manager mentions that he found an inventory number on one of the objects and was able to connect it to the data-set. The player now has some feedback regarding their choice but is not confronted with the uncertainty of the work in a collection. I am not sure how I can communicate this without losing the open interpretative approach.

Another criticism voiced after the publishing *Feeling the Past* was that the people in the museum do not feel like characters but more like narrative devices. While this is subjective, I do agree with this opinion. While it would be easy to say that this is due to the limited length and short development time of the game, I feel like the heart of the reason lies in my focus on the tasks. The tasks, which I would describe as most important part of the game, received the most attention which therefore lead to less development in the character department. For the purpose of the game this is completely fine and justified. For achieving the pedagogical goal of *Feeling the Past*, showing the player what can be gained by using objects as sources, the tasks are more important than the characters. This is different for *Plantation Lives*, where the focus lies much more on the experience of doing research and the connections and relationships formed by that. Here the characters play a different role, which necessitates approaching them differently.

While I already disregarded creating a 3D *game*, reflecting on the whole project and what for example the Smithsonian Collections offer, I probably could have created a better experience—in the sense of closer to the actual work with objects—and by that an increased learning effect by using the 3D resources available on the internet. The 3D collection of the Smithsonian is large enough to cover a wide range of subjects and the presentation of the objects from a visual standpoint comes really close to the real experience. This, of course, would have meant writing the story completely different and moving away from my personal experience in the museum in favour of digitally presenting objects closer to reality. The result would have been a different game with a different emphasis, but maybe better apt to communicate the key insights I wanted to convey. 

#### Marugoto as a teaching device for contemporary history

The intended target group of *Feeling the Past* are university students doing their bachelor's or master's degree. I wanted to make an impact on the source selection in academic history, so apprentice scholars are an appropriate target group. Because I am only familiar with studying history on a bachelor's and master's level and wanted game to be relatable, I chose a Master student as the playable character instead for example a PhD student like in *Plantation Lives*. The story therefore assumes that the player has at least some knowledge of source analysis. During the feedback discussion in the last session of DigiZeit, the question was raised whether the game would also be applicable for other people, for example high school students or museum visitors. The game itself of course is playable by people without prior knowledge of historical work and source selection, but the effect would not be the same. For museum visitors the game could present an insight behind the scenes of a museum. For high school student the game could also show what it feels like doing an internship at a museum or studying history. But for both groups the intended goal would not be met. 

Martin Dusinberre mentioned that the demand of finding new ways to teach history exists among high school teachers. *Marugoto* could definitely be a way of conveying historical ideas on high school level. But I feel like the story has to be specifically written for the target group to be most effective. If I were to rewrite *Feeling the Past* for high school students, I would change the main character to someone who has just finished their school years and is interested in history. Erick Lauber raises the question of character in video games (Lauber, 2005). The ideal case for a game-designer in his opinion would be to have a character just like the user. This would increase "identifiability and, presumably, learning" (p. 53). I agree with this statement. The tasks in a rewrite would be more basic at the beginning, but could definitely become more complex as the game goes on. This way the player could become familiar with the work inside a museum and of a historian.

Another suggestion was playing the game from inside the museum. For *Feeling the Past* in the present state the added benefit would not be significant. But as a general idea, games offer a real addition to the classic museum experience. It has been shown that a collaborative learning strategy between schools and museums can reinforce students' learning experience (Griffin, 2004). Bossavit et al. argue that applying informal educational tools like games within a formal learning context can enhance museum experiences and link them to classrooms (Bossavit et al., 2018). A rewrite of *Feeling the Past* could involve having the player physically finding the object in the collection and inspect it in person. This would strengthen the main argument that there is something to gain from using objects as historical sources. The play-through, a mix of virtual and real experiences, would have to be supervised if the players are physically interacting with real objects, but it would improve both the experience of being in the museum and learning about objects as historical sources. Still, it is important for the game to be created with the museum context in mind. Jenner and de Araújo have created a learning game for the German Maritime Museum centered around a conserved cog (Jenner & de Araújo, 2009). They noted based on behavioural research of museum visitors that for a game to be played inside the museum it has to capture the potential player's attention within 1-2 minutes, otherwise they pass onto the next module. Furthermore, long instructions should be avoided and the overall playtime should not be over 10 to 15 minutes.

### Conclusion

*Feeling the Past* had (and still has) the ambitious goal to change how historians select the sources they use in their work. It is too early to make any assessment of success or failure. However, I feel like an educational game like *Feeling the Past* can be a way to achieve change and the literature seems to support this thesis. I consider the open approach of *Feeling the Past*—giving the player freedom and allowing them to interpret the exercises based on their own interests—one of the best ways to show people what can be gained from historical sources. The future for educational games seems bright as more funding is allocated for it and multiple fields are interested in pursuing their possibilites for the humanities. A lot of work is being done on how to achieve desired pedagogical goals trough games. The opportunities are countless and the creative freedom of game-making specifically allows for various new approaches in writing and teaching history.

### Bibliography

Bossavit, Benoît et al.: Educational Games to Enhance Museum Visits for Schools. In: Journal of Educational Technology & Society, Vol. 21, No. 4 (October 2018). pp. 171—186.

Farge, Arlette: The Allure of the Archives. New Haven & London 1989. 

Findlen, Paula: Objects of History: the Past Materialized. In: History and Theory, Vol. 59, No. 2 (June 2020). pp. 270—282.

Flaherty, Colleen: Is Collaboration Worth It? January 6, 2017. (https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2017/01/06/historians-push-more-collaboration-field-traditionally-has-snubbed-group-efforts)

Griffin, Janette: Research on Students and Museums: Looking More Closely at the Students in School Groups. In: Science Education, Vol. 88, (Supplement 1), (June 2004). pp. S59—S70.

Historisches Seminar, Universität Zürich: Historisches Seminar. PS Grundlagenpapiere. Frühlingssemester 2013.

Hunt, Lynn: Writing History in the Global Era. New York 2015.

Jang, Hyewon: Identifying 21st Century STEM Competencies Using Workplace Data. In: Journal of Science Journal of Science, Vol. 25, No. 2 (April 2016). pp. 284—301. 

Jenner, Walter / de Araújo, Leonardo Moura: Hanse 1380 — A learning game for the German Maritime Museum. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Conference Paper), (September 2009). pp. 1—6. 

Lahnwong, Chayanit: The Framework Development for Interpretation Of Students Reading Literacy In Teaching And Learning Through Open Approach. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series. Series 1340 (2019). pp. 1—8.

Lauber, Erick: The Design of 3-D, Fast-Action Digital Games for the Classroom. In: Educational Technology, Vol. 45, No. 6 (November-December 2005). pp. 52—55.

Milligan Ian: Illusionary Order: Online Databases, Optical Character Recognition, and Canadian History, 1997–2010. In: Canadian Historical Review, Vol. 94, No. 4 (2013). 540–569. Citation from: Putnam 2016. 

Pérez-Colado, Víctor Manuel et al.: Simplifying the Creation of Adventure Serious Games with Educational-Oriented Features. In: Journal of Educational Technology & Society, Vol. 22, No. 3 (July 2019). pp. 32—46.

Putnam, Lara: The Transnational and the Text-Searchable: Digitized
Sources and the Shadows They Cast. In: The American Historical Review, Vol. 121, No. 2 (April 2016). pp. 377–402.

Trouillot, Michel-Rolph: Silencing the Past. Boston 1995.


	Henrik Jochum

	Bachwiesstrasse 11

	9402 Mörschwil

	henrik.jochum@uzh.ch

	079 126 92 17

	Matrikelnummer: 15-731-367

	Major: History of the Contemporary World / Zeitgeschichte

	Minor: Wirtschaftsgeschichte und Ökonomie

	Module: History in a Digitized World (Martin Dusinberre, Daniel McDonald)