### Digital Databases and Reaching the Fundamental Goal of ***Feeling the Past***

Databases are a historian's window into a digital archive or a modern collection. Their structure influences the way we select sources and shape our research. Naturally, they tend to focus on their job as archival tools rather than a historian's research help. While a considerable amount of writing discusses how archives influence historians (see for example: [Farge, 1989](bibliography.md#farge-1989) / [Trouillot, 1995](bibliography.md#trouillot-1995)), there is still more work to be done regarding which impact the digital advancements of the past decades had on the way we conduct our research today. One example is Lara Putnam's article on "The Transnational and the Text-Searchable" ([Putnam, 2016](bibliography.md#putnam-2016)). She examines how source digitalization has transformed the work of historians, especially with an eye on transnational research. In relation to my project, an important part is her citing of a study by Ian Milligan, which showed that in the wake of digitalization the citations of two newspapers increased tenfold while citation of their non-digitized contemporaries stayed steady or fell (p. 388, [Milligan, 2013](bibliography.md#milligan-2013)). This has important implications on *Feeling the Past's* fundamental goal of introducing more objects to the historical source selection. 

For one, digitalization seems to be a key component to the solution of the abovementioned lack of awareness. As more and more source research and source work itself is being done digitally, trying to facilitate finding objects for historians using this channel seems to be natural. Like I already mentioned, most databases are created focussing on their archival task, rather than to support historical research. Therefore one option of getting more objects into historical research would be reconceptualizing digital data-sets, something I tried in *Feeling the Past's* third task with the presentation of the straitjacket in the style of Neil MacGregor's *A History of the World in 100 Objects*, based both on the original data-set of the HVM and my personal impressions of the object. By focussing on different aspects of the object, like questions regarding its social context or production, already on the level of the data-set the work of a historian can be facilitated or supported, and thanks to the digital format continuously expanded. Another possibility is the addition of the third dimension, like a 3D digitalization project of the Smithsonian Collections currently is pursuing. The project uses three-dimensional capture technology to create digital representations of objects from the collections of the Smithsonian and distributes them on a publicly accessable website (for more information see: https://3d.si.edu/) While these approaches definitly are steps in the right direction, it won't change much if another fundamental problem isn't solved: Access.

Similar to disparaties in access to digital sources ([Putnam, 2016](bibliography.md#putnam-2016), p. 389), there are differences how and which objects are accessible to the public. As an example: the collection of the Historisches und Völkerkundemuseum St.Gallen includes around 80'000 objects, which are inventoried in an internal digital database. Thanks to this database, to which I have access because I work in the HVM, I was able to find the objects used in *Feeling the Past*. There exists a [public online database](www.online-collection.ch/), which only displays 8'000 data-sets, 10 percent of the whole collection. 90 percent are therefore not available to the public and cannot be found without internal access. I think this contributes to the favouring of text over objects, as historians are simply not aware of all the objects they could theoretically use as sources. By making their databases online, collections would faciliate an historian's search for interesting objects.